I'll give you a catalog of my Melville collection.
Where was that, here?
That was at Yale, yeah.
That was at Yale, the time of the 100th anniversary of his death in 91, and there were a lot of Melville things going on.
But anyway, Harvard ended up, you know, Melville's granddaughter married Keyes Metcalf, who's the librarian at Harvard.
And so a chunk of books in Melville's library went to Harvard.
Another Melville granddaughter gave a chunk to New York Public, and those are the two big groups of books that were his library books.
The bulk of his library was sold by his wife after he died to a Brooklyn bookseller for $150.
And so books from Melville's library are out floating around.
Oh, I've seen a couple of the Lilly Library, for instance.
Yeah, and there's a whole book about it by a guy named Merton Seals called Melville's Reading, where Mert tried to
He tracked it down two ways.
One, by references in Melville's writings that made it clear he'd read a book.
So, you know, he could identify a book without necessarily knowing where the book was.
And then, the other way around, of finding a book that had Melville's notes in it.
And because the bulk of the library was just dispersed in the trade, important books have continued to turn up over time.
There were two in the Garden Library.
There was Melville's Milton, which
I underbid, in which she ended up at Princeton, which Steve Weissman bought on behalf of Princeton, which actually had, um, Haven had paid some incredible, I think Haven paid $100,000 for it.
It went for $55,000, I think, at the garden, but you can check that.
And then Haven had, um, Mel Vilstante, which had showed up, you know, kind of at the height of his collecting.
He bought, and he wouldn't let anybody look at.
And, um,
I bought it there.
And there is no book I own of my collections that has been more looked at by scholars.
Probably 20 different Melville scholars have come to look at that book.
In fact, we got an email this morning from a guy who's writing his dissertation on Melville and Dante.
who i had to send an email back to this morning saying he's welcome to come look at it how much does he how much does he reveal himself he must obviously reveal quite a bit of himself well it's it's hard to say i mean this is where i don't feel like a scholar at all i mean i just i'm happy to be the aider and the better of these guys i mean if you get the amount of melville criticism and its its density um in terms of being post-modern criticism as far as i'm concerned is huge and you know
Anything you can think of, somebody's coming up with out of this stuff.
And I'm very happy to just let these guys come and look at it.
A lot of the annotations are in the form of underlining, marking things, sometimes triple underlining.
Well, then the trick is to find resonances in his writing.
Exactly, exactly.
And so, in that sense, I feel very much like the steward of the material.
I'm very happy to have these people come.
I mean, I've really enjoyed my association with the Melville scholarly world.
They all love me, because I'll let them look at the stuff.
I mean, you know, it's a choice of somebody like me or somebody like Amour.
Who keeps on the phone.
Take me every time, you know.
I mean, I'm happy to, you know, have them come.
I enjoy their company.
They're nice folks, you know.
So, when did this start?
Melville?
I started collecting Melville in, like,
How do you walk that line that so many booksellers say is a very fine one, separating, you know, the bookseller from... Well, in that case, it was a little easier for me because... It wasn't what I was doing.
I mean, my company deals in that.
Harry Halliday runs the literary part of it.
But he was one author.
It was, you know, what I was most interested in, too, were not, although I've got all the Melville first editions, was manuscript material, these books from this library, and so forth, which, when I started this, people said, you'll never be able to put together a collection that means anything.
It's far too late.
Well, I did, though.
I gather it's still a growing collection, right?
Well, not really.
I mean, I've been too involved in the color plate books, and all my money's going into color plate books.
So you're collecting color plate books?
American color plate books, yeah.
So two major collections, or is there another one?
Oh, no.
I bought a major collection of Robert Graves and Siegfried Sassou and Overlone Poets, which I have.
In fact, a chunk of that was just on an exhibit at the British Art Center at Yale.
And so I'll give you an exhibition catalog on that till then.
You're a major collector in your own right.
Yeah, I am, as a matter of fact.
And do you act as your own bookseller, or do you not rely like a lawyer?
Oh, no, I mean, of course I do, yeah.
I buy the stuff myself.
I mean, obviously I'm tremendously helped in forming a collection by my friendships in the trade.
You know, I'm very easy to deal with, and with the things that I've been collecting, I mean, I'm willing to pay
going ready.
So, I've been, it's been much easier to form a collection because of that.
So, there's something like the color plate books.
I mean, a lot of, you know, it's generally known that I'm doing this, particularly after this.
And, you know, people offer me stuff.
I go around, you know, I buy books all the time.
What's the black orchid of this particular, what's the rare bird that you must have, that you don't have, or do you have everything that you find?
No, I mean, I've got some of the great, difficult books.
I mean, the biggest and most, and one of the more difficult books is the Bean, the Circle and Bean edition of Audubon, the big, the American chromolithographic reprint of the Virgin America.
I do have that.
I don't have the American edition of Calvin's North American Indian Portfolio.
That's one of the great rarities, one of the most expensive books.
And you're actively searching for it, I gather.
Yeah.
I mean, there's one actually coming up in this sale, but I'm going to be bidding on it per customer.
And so how do you, that's a delicate situation, or maybe it's not.
It's the kind of thing maybe you'd like to have for yourself.
I would like to have for myself.
There's a limit to what I could pay, which is a high limit.
In this case... Now, this is a hypothetical, because I don't want you to talk about somebody you're representing, but let's say the customer's limit is here, so we reach that limit, but Bill reaches it.
What's the limit is up here?
Would you keep going and, I guess, secure it for yourself?
In this case, I knew this is somebody I know well, somebody I've done business with for a long time, and somebody who's richer than I am.
And he told me a long time ago this was a book he wanted.
And so, you know, when I knew that the Siebert Sale was going to take place, I called him up.
This was last November.
And I said, look, there's going to be an American Catalan.
And you know I'm doing this color plate collection.
And it's a book I'd very much like to have.
But I know you want it.
And all I want you to do is say to me that you'll pay more for it than I would.
And if you would, I'll do your bid.
And, you know, he...
We talked the numbers, and, you know, he was willing to do it.
And I said, fine, you know, I mean, you're willing to pay what I am.
You know, I'll do your bid.
But on the other hand, if I'd been willing to pay more than he was, I would have rather expected it.
And in his case, I think if I, you know, if he wasn't willing to pay what I was willing to pay, I think he would have said, you go for it.
So, you know, I haven't really had a conflict in dealing with the color plate book stuff.
That's a perfect example right there of how you handle it, I guess.
Yeah.
What would you estimate the size of the stock is here?
Oh, gosh.
We've probably got right now about 11,000 catalog pieces of Americana, probably 20,000 catalog pieces of literature, and we occupied
two buildings here.
I'll give you a tour in a little bit.
I don't know if you got a tour the last time.
No, I didn't, actually.
We've got two buildings here with probably about half a mile of shelving in them, a lot of which is reference material.
And then my warehouse out in Hamden, I've got another mile and a half of shelving.
So we have at least as many books, again, that are uncataloged, although that tends to be some of them we never will catalog.
I mean, it's just stuff that came in with collections.
stuff that we're going to get rid of, I mean, stuff that we're feeding into the various small auctions, or we're wholesaling off to people.
It's, you know, it's more used book shelf stock.
It's just, you know, not something that we can affordably catalog and put up.
It's much more, you know, kind of used book stuff.
Now, you don't have a sign, this is not an open, do you regard this as an open shop?
No, we're by appointment, or by appointment.
And that's, as much as anything,
just because of the physical layout here.
You know, because we're on different floors and different levels, and everybody's working at their workstations, if somebody comes to, people, most people who come to see us are people we know well, and we're happy to give them the run of the place.
But if we don't know them, we have to watch them.
I mean, it's, I'm afraid, just the way it is.
I mean, I've had, I've had books stolen from me, and
If you don't know somebody, you can't just leave them alone.
I think the nature of your business, too, is that it is developing relationships.
Absolutely.
It's not an over-the-transom kind of a business that you run.
You know, it's a truism of all small businesses that 20% of your customers are 80% of your business.
One of my customers told me that a long time ago, and
I said, oh, that's not true, and then I went and looked, and it was true.
That's the hermitation thing.
Squeeze it down to the 20 or 30.
Yeah, well, and that really is what it comes down to, I think for most, I think for just about everybody.
I mean, at any given time, probably half of my business has been my top ten customers.
That top ten has changed.
I mean, there's very seldom been a year when
the top customer was the same customer as the year before.
I mean, there are people who were long-term averages, there are people who've kind of come and gone for one reason or another, or because there was some single big sale to somebody that they came out very high up in the ratings because of a single sale.
But, by and large, I think every one of the big rare book firms, I would argue, is
basically operating to deal with a couple dozen people.
Now, you're basically, you're doing a lot of business on the web, aren't you?
We are doing a lot of business on the web, although in terms of our overall cash volume, it's not that big.
It's more, and I know this is true of Lou, of Heritage, because Lou and I have specifically, you know, had a conversation about this.
It's a lot of invoices, but a relatively small average invoice.
I mean, it's great in the sense
for both of us that we're selling stuff that we view as sub-catalog.
You know, we don't want to put items that inexpensive in catalogs.
Because catalogs are expensive, right?
Yeah, exactly.
So there's this real cost.
You guys, you have yours printed, I think.
Yeah.
Staying out press?
Oh, no, no, no, no.
Didn't you do that?
There's a local printer here.
It's a nice, very high-quality job.
They do a nice job.
They're not terribly expensive.
But still, there's a,
you know, a real cost of publishing something in a catalog.
Not to mention the work that goes into it.
By the way, tell me what your time constraints are.
Yeah, well, we can also have some lunch if you'd like to have lunch.
Sure, whatever.
But, I mean, if you have to break or anything like that, let me know.
The importance of the catalog and the writing of the descriptions, do you write most of the descriptions?
These days, most of the descriptions are written by Joe Bray, who works for me.
How do you spell?
B-R-A-Y.
But we've got it.
You know, we've got a big... I have as many records of things that have been sold as things that are live.
So there are a lot of books, you know, that are the standard books in our field, that when they come back into our hands, we don't have to write any description.
I mean, you have to change the physical description of the book.
But the abstract, the discussion of what the book's about and why it's important and what's in it, is insane.
So cataloging gets ever more efficient for us because we only kept to catalog, really, the new books.
And that's the beauty of a computer, too.
You do have a database of these things.
Yeah.
So, I mean, I've got something like 25,000 records from my Americana database, but I've only got about 11,000 live ones.
Live meaning?
Meaning that we've got copies for sale, and the others are sold records.
But, you know, I mean, typically these days, well, I'd look at what I bought at the Siebert sale.
Half of what we bought at the Siebert sale we'd had copies of before.
It's just a matter of moving it from the sold file and changing the physical description of the actual copy in your catalog.
The importance of researching items on those rare occasions where it's something you don't know, determining the significance of an item.
I mean, I wonder how many things there are that you don't know in Americana.
Well, that's the fun thing about the book business.
You keep finding things you don't know.
Or you're coming with books you've never seen before, you've never focused on.
And there's no better way to find things out than to kind of have an object in view.
It's often difficult, at least for me, to abstractly learn things.
I mean, you can sit there and they can read a bibliography, but if you've got things and you've got to find out about them,
understand all about them and they're complicated, then that's when you can really learn them.
You made a lot of news when you bought the Declaration of Independence, and so you've had a couple of really, I think you handled it.
Louisiana Purchase Proclamation, you probably think.
I'm sorry, Louisiana Purchase Proclamation.
Didn't you do a Columbus Letter once?
I handled two of the three Columbus Letters that came through in 1992.
So these make news, but personally, one of the some of the more exciting
Oh, of recent things, I just sold to the Library of Congress, and it's going to be one of their, you know, things, acquisitions for their 200th anniversary, a group of photographs that were taken by the British Northwest Boundary Commission in the course of surveying the boundary.
This is the first photograph taken in the Pacific Northwest.
This is the first exploration photograph there.
This is 1859, 60, 61.
It's only 20 years after the photography.
Surveying out in western, along the Washington, but now the Washington border, out to the Rocky Mountains.
Those turned up in a Sotheby's book sale in London.
Very out of context, completely underdescribed.
There are a couple other sets.
None of them exactly the same.
One that was taken by the Royal Engineers.
The Royal Engineers have a set in their archives.
All the Royal Engineers were trained in photography at what's now the Victoria and Albert, then the South Kensington Museum.
They've got a set.
Yale has a set that was in the papers of one of the American boundary commissioners.
But this set was evidently belonged to one of the officers on the survey.
And that was an amazing thing.
And the NLC didn't have it?
No.
Those were the known sets, those three.
And this is, you know, surveying one of the boundaries of the United States.
So that's going to be one of LCU's big things coming up.
How do you feel with that?
Do you still get that?
Oh, I mean, it's terrifically exciting.
A whole great bunch of Stephen F. Austin letters showed up about a year and a half ago in New Orleans.
We were able to buy all those, and we sold those to a private collector.
I mean, that was terrific material to handle.
In books, actually, one of the most exciting things I've handled when I think about this is something I saw of Bill Scheide, which is really the first printed account of Indians on the American mainland.
It's a little book that describes the coasting voyage of Yucatan that preceded Cortez by a guy named Grave, Wanda Gravea.
And there are two known copies of this pamphlet.
And that turned up in a German sale, I forget which house, stuck in there.
It wasn't in the Americana or the travel section.
It was in the Hult of Druka section.
You were somebody in your staff.
I did.
So everything that comes in, you go through.
Oh, I buy everything.
Every catalog, every sale.
Yeah, absolutely.
I mean, I buy everything we buy.
I catalog the most important things.
You buy everything from William Reese Company, every book that enters here.
This is not something you delegate to anybody else.
No.
I mean, it goes back to what I said.
I mean, buying books is the key to the book business.
Once you have good books, these days it's not that hard to sell them.
It's buying them and knowing what to price them, and therefore knowing what you can pay for them.
That's the key to the book business.
I devote more time to buying books than I do to selling books.
That's fascinating.
Well, I think you'd find, I mean, if you pose that question to, you know, my peers, I think they'd say the same thing.
And determining value, obviously.
Yeah.
Without benefit of an auction.
Yeah, I mean, an auction... See, this is the next two weeks of, this is the rest of the month auction.
Compile.
Yeah.
And that's just what, you know, what we're currently dealing with.
I mean, that's like last week.
That's what we've done.
They're like 20, easily.
20, 25, yeah.
You know, I mean, it's, so I go through everything.
I mean, that's something, I mean, I tend to do that, you know, at home in the evening.
But the German thing was in German, so you must be German, I gather.
Well, you know, the answer to that is Lathrop Hartford was asked,
uh how why uh how he could deal in incunables when he only spoke english and all the incunables were in something other than english and he said i know the word for imperfect in 17 languages so that's the quick answer to that i mean um bookseller and title page linguistics is a is a different proposition you know the it's funny you mention that because um i my
Linguistic skills are very limited, sadly.
I wish I'd paid more attention in Latin when I was in school, yeah.
But I find you take certain things like, say, 17th century Spanish, which has changed, Spanish has changed more from the 17th century to now than, say, English has changed from Elizabethan times to now.
Much greater change in the language, the way the written language looks.
People who are quite good in modern Spanish, and I'm only barely able to read modern Spanish, and then only somewhat, have a hard time reading this stuff.
But if you know the forms and formats that things are done in, or the kinds of things you're typically dealing with, royal decrees, these different administrative and bureaucratic forms, if you know that stuff, you're more quickly able to tell what the thing is than if you can read it.
Look at some of this stuff.
What I'm now showing them are, these are 17th century French administrative documents.
Okay, so these things are, you know, they're different kinds.
Some are arrests.
Some of them are treaties.
Some of them, they have all these different catchphrases.
If you know what the catchphrases are, you kind of immediately know where the document's headed, what it's about.
This is dated 1679.
This is arrested by the Constitution.
Yeah.
So this is a decree from the king's council, which is different than a proclamation by the king or different than something like this,
which is this, for example.
French Duties and American Tobacco.
I was wondering where the Americana came in.
Right.
This is, you know, the arguments that the negotiators are putting on the table at the Treaty of Utrecht.
The Americana connection here is that lots of sugar islands in the Caribbean changed hands at the Treaty of Utrecht.
So where do you find things like this?
You show this to somebody, you know, to somebody who's
good reader of French, and they'll toil through the 17th century French trying to figure out what it is.
I can immediately tell you what it's about, you know, because I know the historical background, and I know what's going on here.
The Treaty of Utrecht, there's a lot of hard negotiation.
The French are actually in a bad position because they've kind of gotten their asses kicked in various places.
They're fighting to keep a hold of whatever they can, and they want to get back their sugar islands.
The English should take it away from them.
Well, that's bringing something to that.
That's
what you spent the last 30 years, or however many years it is.
But that's what any good book dealer is doing.
They're taking their built-up body of knowledge and applying it, and then they're taking the opportunity to build... To give a context.
To build more on the context.
And so every opportunity they have to handle something new is going to add to the context.
So if I'm a collector of what?
What kind of collective would be interested in these French documents?
Well, if you were interested in the history of, you could be interested in the history of European diplomacy.
You could be interested in the history of the Caribbean.
You could be interested in something like these things, quite often slavery, because many of these things involve the slave trade because they involve the sugarology.
You could be interested in economics.
This is an ordinance that has to do with duties on sugar.
So that relates to the Caribbean.
It relates to the slave trade.
It relates to the economics of the sugar business, which is, of course, a very important thing at that point.
And when it says, what does that mean?
So it's a decree by the Council of State.
So basically, the King's Council has met.
They're making a specific decree.
I didn't get it.
In this point, it looks like they're giving one man some kind of specific dispensation.
They're giving this guy a break on his sugar duties or something like that.
So, you know, material like this can look fairly dense, and this is where book dealers can really do their work.
you can explain the importance of these things and how they fit into a context.
But, yeah, my point is, so I'm here and I collect this stuff.
You're going to take it upon yourself to explain to me why this is a very important document and why it's, why I should be taken out by a checkbook and paying whatever.
Exactly.
And I'm doing that even with things less ephemeral than this.
I mean, what, if you're collecting American travel books, well, what are the ones that are
the significant ones, the ones that are well written, that are interesting, that break new ground, that the first person to go someplace, or first person to describe someplace, versus ones that are more run-of-the-mill.
And of course, which ones are rare, which ones aren't.
In this case, with Siebert, with my best customers, and I'm working with them, they're saying to me, these guys are going to spend a lot of money here.
Their first question to me generally is, Bill, you know what I collect, you know what I'm most interested in.
What are the books that I'm most interested in here that I'm not going to get another chance at?
Because ultimately they do have finite budgets, even though they're big ones.
Excuse me, Bill, are you going to need lunch?
Would you like a sandwich?
Sure.
Yeah, we'll get a sandwich, Joe.
What would you like?
What kind of... We got anything you can think of.
So, I mean, what they're saying to me in a situation like that is, okay, look, you know, I'm willing to spend a half million bucks at the secret sale, but I want to spend that money on stuff that is the most important to my collection that I'm not going to have another chance at, you know.
If we're going to have another chance at it, well, let's worry about that later, you know.
What do I have to buy now that I'm not going to get another chance at?
And then what are we going to have to pay?
So they ask you this, and you must have some sense of the things that aren't going to be available.
So, yeah.
So, I mean, what I really bring to the table in working for somebody at something like Seaver is that I was able to, I was saying to them, okay, this is what's important to you, and this is what it's going to cost you.
You know, we've got to figure out, and of course, in a sale like Seaver, you've got to think in terms of the flow of the sale, too.
You know, the thing you want the most is the last lot in the sale.
It's a lot more complicated than the thing you want the most is the first lot in the sale, you know?
And so I'm bringing all that context there.
And I'm going, I mean, I've spent, I guess at this point, five full days down at Sotheby's with people looking at stuff.
So you bring your clients in.
Yeah.
And we're looking at things.
They're pulling it off.
They're saying, well, tell me about this book.
And I'm not just saying, well, it's a pretty book.
I'm saying, you know, look, you know, this is the auction copy of this book.
But I can tell you, you know, two copies have changed hands privately since the last auction record.
And they went for this and this.
And this copy is almost certainly going to go for more than that.
So if you want this book, you're going to have to be thinking in terms of spending, you know, $50,000 instead of $15,000 to $20,000, it says in the estimate.
And, I mean, that's why, you know, quite frankly, we did so well in the first Siebert sale, that I was able to get, I was able to really give my clients what turned out to be a very accurate idea of what they were really going to have to spend, and they were able to concentrate their fire.
Instead of, like, having lots of bits that didn't make it all across the sale, they focused on what they really wanted, and they knew what they were going to have to pay.
And I was right most of the time.
And disregarding the range of estimates that they... Yeah, I mean, the range of estimates, the estimates were very erratic, very, very erratic.
But you also know who else is out there who may be interested in the same... Sure.
And, you know, there are going to be cases where it's really going to be two people, and if you have a sense of what the other person's going to do.
Whereas one of the... some of the competition, I think, was operating off the estimates because they didn't have
and form depth of knowledge.
And they figured, well, we'll spend a lot of money.
We'll spend double the high estimate.
Well, double the high estimate wasn't necessarily, sometimes that was too much, and sometimes it wasn't enough, you know?
And then there's you never know factors, you know?
I mean, I saw 25 Italian bankers walk into Christie's that day to buy the Leonardo.
Right, yeah.
And they figured, okay, I saw Lou Weinstein the day before, and he said, I figure it's 11 million.
Yeah.
Well, but nobody counted on Bill Gates.
Oh, sure.
And that threw everything out.
There was somebody else who just came in and, you know, said, well, fine.
You can never know till you get there.
I mean, you know, when I was arranging credit terms with Sotheby's for the sale, they said, how much are you going to spend?
And I said, if I knew how much I was going to spend, it wouldn't be an auction.
I mean.
Do you enjoy this?
Do you have this kind of competition of the auction?
I mean,
Not as much as I enjoy straight book selling.
I mean, I much more enjoy finding things, being able to catalog them and explain them, and selling them to the right person.
I enjoy that more.
I do enjoy the auction stuff, though.
I mean, it's, you know, because in this case it's so much great stuff, a very important collection.
But it's a huge amount of work.
I mean, if you're going to, I mean, I figured part one of the Siebert sale, I probably devoted a solid month, scattered over a long period of time, you know, building through a crescendo around the sale, and then continuing after the sale, because believe me, you know, you're going to try to pick up 246 watts from Sotheby's
and get them back here, and then get it all invoiced out and off to people and everything.
That was a lot of money that's in play here.
Yeah, that was a lot of work too.
So I devoted probably a solid month of work to Siebert I. I think Siebert II will be a little less because some of the work of Siebert II is not in Siebert I. And some of the people I'm working with, it's kind of easier this time because we've just, you know, we've been through it together.
You mentioned earlier three booksellers who I've interviewed for this look on bookselling, Steve Weissman and Barney Rosenthal and Fred Schreiber, and it's interesting, each of those three, and Steve is interesting because particularly interesting, he's an American who's now, you know, a Brit, so to speak.
And each of these guys has said that there is a European tradition in bookselling.
Yes.
And I guess the subtext to that is it's kind of a scholarly
Do you subscribe to that?
Would you subscribe to the view that there is a European tradition as opposed to an American tradition?
And if so, where do you find yourself, or do you represent an American tradition?
I guess the American tradition is just get it done, don't worry about it.
No, I think that's right.
The American book trade, I think, benefited terrifically from the influx of the Europeans who came here as exiles or refugees in the 30s and 40s, and who became some of the most successful dealers and some of the most interesting dealers.
And I think that did it a lot to raise scholarly standards in the American book world.
And I do think that
the European tradition is a more scholarly one.
At this point, the book trade at the highest level is so international that I don't know that you can make those distinctions anymore.
I mean, Steve, I always thought of Steve when he was in this country as the best bookseller in the United States, and now he's not here anymore.
And, you know, there was never any question in my mind that
And you're not the first person to say that to me, by the way.
Yeah.
And, you know, I've always admired the way Steve did business, and, you know, I wouldn't say I've modeled myself on him by any means, but he and I certainly think in very similar tracks about what a bookseller ought to do and how a bookseller ought to do it.
It's more than selling books, isn't it?
It's not so obvious, but I think we should state that.
Steve, of course, has always been the grandmaster of understatement, and nobody ever sold more books while pretending he couldn't care less than Steve.
I mean, I knew people who would tell me, collectors who would tell me, you know, they'd just be driven crazy because they'd keep waiting for Steve to try to sell them something, and he never would, you know?
And then finally they'd say, well, he wanted to buy it.
He'd look kind of mildly displeased and say, oh, okay.
And, of course, Steve wants to sell books as much as anybody, but he really has that down to an arc, you know, kind of not really caring whether you buy it or not.
Well, he has gotten some of that British way of doing things.
Right, but Steve actually is far more hardworking than most of his colleagues.
I love the British book trade, and I've spent a lot of time in England, and some of my best friends are British booksellers, but I would say the British trade approaches selling books with the kind of discipline, say, that Steve or I bring to it, in terms of, you know, pursuing options to buy and in terms of cataloging and stuff like that.
They'd much rather go out to lunch for a couple hours
And if you know any French books out there, they really would much rather go out to lunch for a much longer period of time.
Briefly, we mentioned the Internet, but you still feel that you have to handle the goods, even though so many people will buy a thing out of the catalog, it's still essential to get that book.
Sure, well, the higher up the price ladder you go, the more... And I guess I'm looking for trends, you know, down the line.
Yeah, I mean, I don't think...
one will ever be able to build big customers and sell expensive books without a lot of real personal contact.
And it doesn't necessarily have to be face to face.
There are a lot of options for personal contact these days in terms of the telephone and email and a variety of other things.
I mean, my best customers I don't see very often face to face.
I do spend a lot of time talking to them on the telephone.
I think that when you start
getting into five, when you get over five figures and as you head north of that, whatever you're selling, it doesn't have to be books, confidence in the seller, the buyer's confidence in the seller becomes more and more of an issue.
And the guys who, you know, are buying very expensive books from me have confidence in me and my pricing and why I'm pricing them that way.
I think that's always going to be true, no matter what you're talking about.
I mean, Graham Rader once said to me that, of course, this is Graham talking, so you have to take this with a grand grain of salt, but it's true in a way.
He said, no sale over $100,000 is ever accomplished without great pain.
And my experience of
wealthy people is that they didn't get that way because they gave away money.
And by and large, people who are spending very large amounts of money for things want to know why, and they want to know why in detail.
And, you know, they expect you to be able to tell them quickly and not waste their time why they should spend a lot of money for it.
We never finished, we started back at Yale, and we established how you
You always had this passion for books and the people that you worked with.
So you knew, you actually were a pro while you were an undergraduate.
That's right, yeah.
And so when you graduated in 77, I think you said it was?
Yeah, actually, the first year I was out, I was working with the late Fred White, and I was still actually at that point a little unsure whether I wanted to pursue an academic career or a bookselling career.
So the academic year after I graduated,
I actually worked at the Beinecke.
And as about, you know, I kind of worked there maybe 30 hours a week on an unpaid basis as Archie Hanna's assistant.
And I spent the other rest of my time working book selling.
And so... Based here in Little Haven.
Yeah.
And out of that experience, I mean, it was a very valuable experience to me.
in terms of, you know, really working in a rare book library.
I didn't think it was valuable to them, too, because one of the main things I did for them was survey sections of the stacks, finding things that should be in Beinecke that shouldn't be in Sterling.
So I pulled a lot of, you know, you get any big old great general collection, like Harvard's or Yale's or, you know, any of the big old universities, and they just stopped sitting in open stacks that shouldn't be there.
And I pulled some amazing stuff out of the stacks and moved it to Beinecke.
Can you think off the top, without even having to be that specific, the kinds of things you might find in Stirling that instantly spoke up?
The nicest one is a book that Clarence King did when he was running the King Survey in the West, and Timothy O'Sullivan, a famous photographer, was working with him.
He did a gift book for Christmas called Three Lakes, and it's dedicated.
He found these three lakes.
Christmas what?
18?
Christmas 1870.
They're three lakes high on the Sierras he named after his three nieces.
And it's a big folio book.
He made ten copies for presentation.
with 10 mounted O'Sullivan photographs.
The Yale copy he gave to O.C.
Marsh, the great paleontologist, who was a Yale professor and a great friend of his.
Marsh left his library to Yale when he died, went into the Yale library.
The call number, just to give you an idea, the Yale call number was C3.
Wow.
And it was stuck, you know, sitting up in a folio thing on its side.
In Sterling.
I mean, there has never been one for sale
since I pulled that out and moved it over in 1978.
Well, there were only 10 presidents.
There were only 10.
There are others.
There are no copies.
Harvard has one, and I checked it at one point.
AAS May?
Four or five of them are locatable at this point.
You know, I'd have to think if that came up, it would go for $60,000, $70,000.
There it was sitting in a stag.
And there are also some tragic things.
There was a Folio McKennian Hall sitting up there, which is not a rare book.
Yale's got a couple of copies.
What points again?
Folio McKennian Hall, a North American Indian, a purchase of North American Indians.
At that point, in 1978, it was a $10,000 to $12,000 book, and every plate was missing.
Jesus.
You know, somebody had systematically removed the plates.
You know, Yale had a couple other sets in Beinecke.
It wasn't a blower to their research collections, but on the other hand, it was a duplicate.
They could have traded it for something they needed.
So, you know, there were some things that were missing, but there were also a lot of really quite extraordinary things.
So you spent the year doing this?
I spent, yeah, nine months, and I really, at the end of it, came out convinced that bookselling was for me.
by nature impatient of bureaucratic constraints, and I have kind of, you know, I have an entrepreneurial view of the world, and less highly developed than it is now.
So you have to have this business.
There has to be a businessman in Bill Reese, too, doesn't there?
Well, absolutely.
I mean, this is, you know, this is an essential element.
It's like knowing how to buy books.
If you're not a good business person, you can't run a small business.
And there are a lot of aspects of running a small business that are universal issues that have nothing to do with what you're doing.
And so, yeah, you do have to successfully combine those.
I mean, in American bookselling, I mean, the person who most successfully combined a passion for the material in an entrepreneurial sense was Krauss.
I know Krauss built a great rare book business.
He also made a fortune in
the reprint business.
He bought the Otto Bettman collection.
Yeah, which his heirs, you know, were able to cash in for quite a nice sum to Bill Gates.
You know, he was a great businessman, but he also had a passion for material.
You know, Rosenbach, who's a greater scholar and was a great bookseller because of his enthusiasm, but he was a man who didn't have great business sense.
Yeah, exactly.
I mean, it's hard to say, as, you know, Eddie Wolfe comments several times, I mean, what really would have happened if it hadn't been Philip.
And Philip, on one hand, was a burrer and an irritant.
Hated him.
But he was a very important part of the business, because he provided a lot of drive that Rosenbach might not have had on his own.
Rosenbach would have gotten, you know, too off the track.
And one thing we haven't really hit, and we've hit most of the things I want to do, which is good, the satisfaction that you must feel in helping build collections.
There was one thing I found on LexisNexis, and it's a guy I never heard of, and it was a story out of Portland, Oregon.
Oh, Roger Renlick, yeah.
Yeah, and this was something that you had worked on.
Right, Roger did this NPR show about Lewis and Clark.
But, you know, that's an instance, I guess, where you've worked on a collection that... Well... You were just talking about the satisfaction period, and if you've seen it, you can have it if you'd like it.
It's a piece that I found.
I was searching for you when I came up with this... Yeah, no, I got a copy of this, as a matter of fact.
Well, yeah, there is great satisfaction.
I mean, I think that, again, and I think this is true of other...
other people i view as my peers in the trade almost inevitably from my point of view some of my best customers have become really great friends of mine and so um you know i i've come to feel some kind of personal investment in what they're doing um because they're they're friends as well as customers
And I think, you know, this is true time and time again in the book business.
It's one of the nice things about the book business.
I mean, there are always going to be people that you're dealing with somewhat at arm's length and who don't, where you don't develop that kind of tie.
But, I mean, I think, again, if you look at the career of a Rosenbach, that's very much part of Rosenbach's career.
I mean, the people who were his best customers were people who were
Not uniformly.
I mean, people like the Harknesses, they may have been the people who bought the most from him, and he was never really that close to him.
But look at Frank Hogan first.
Look at the letters.
I mean, I looked at those letters.
I called that chapter Brandy for Heroes, because he writes Hogan.
He says, when you're in Philly, you must come by.
We'll have cocktails, and I want to introduce you to my friends in Philadelphia.
Remember what Johnson said?
Brandy for Heroes.
Hogan, or Rosenwald, or Elkins.
You know, those people are Newtons.
They were very friendly.
Yeah, I mean, Shai's father, in my sense, was somewhat more standoffish kind of guy.
But, you know, those people were people where he really did have their interests at heart in a variety of ways.
And so I think it's one of the nicest things about the book business is that
You know, somebody like, say, Mike Zinman, you know, has been a very good friend of mine as well as somebody who I've dealt with for, you know, for many, many years.
And so I think there's a lot of satisfaction there.
But even if it's a person that doesn't become that close of a friend, there must be a feeling of satisfaction, knowing that you've helped shape what must be a very significant collection.
Yeah, there is.
There is.
I mean... You know, people come to you, and you go through these consultations, and you bring your
knowledge and your research to it, and then you see this body of material developing and growing, and, you know, I'm sure that there are many research level collections that have developed out of what you do.
Well, yeah, as I said, I mean, I think some people you end up developing close relationships with, and I think I feel it more there.
I mean, you know, I have good customers who I'm perfectly friendly with, but, you know, we just never develop that close relationship.
You know, they order from catalogs.
I just feel they don't want to.
They're not interested in that.
They want to buy the books, and that's all they want.
And other people you just get a lot more involved with.
No, this is not for this piece, but it is interesting.
You know, John Block, you went to Yale with him.
Right, yeah.
And he's so funny.
In fact, he's now in the growing room.
We went out for cocktails at the Yale Club.
Well, the second time around.
Yeah, well, John, as you know, I mean, John is the last of a truly diamond breed.
John is actually an old-fashioned press lord, and there aren't many old-fashioned press lords left, you know.
No, you can really count them like this.
And he still behaves like an old-fashioned press lord in lots of ways.
Three-piece, I think he wore a three-piece suit to... As he did every day at Yale.
Believe me, he was the only person walking around Yale in 1975 with a three-piece suit on.
Well, what was your collection?
I would like to know about
What was the collection award, the Van Sinderen Award?
Well, actually, I had two different collections.
And you won it twice?
I won it because the Van Sinderen Award is a sophomore prize and a senior prize.
So you won it both?
My sophomore prize, my big collection at that point, which is I've now dispersed, for the most part, was my collection on ranching and cattle trade in the West.
And my second, because my senior year, I didn't enter that at all.
I entered, maybe this would answer John's complaint,
I entered my reference collection, because by that point I was a bookseller.
And actually, I didn't collect anything except reference books for a long period of time after I entered the book business.
Reference books have always been considered legitimate things for booksellers to collect.
Well, that's basically what I collect now is material that supports my research.
Yeah.
So that's what I entered the second time as my reference collection, so.
You're so funny.
L.D.
Brodsky, he didn't win.
It pisses him off to this day that he finished second, you know, when he was at Yale, his Faulkner collection.
There was some guy who had a collection on railroad timetables, you know.
Railroad timetables?
I don't know about that.
I mean, I've been... Well, I mentioned it to the fellow, I forget his name right now, who ran the Elizabethan club.
Chief Parks.
And he said, yes, I know that collection.
I said, I know that railroad timetable.
That was a very good collection.
Well, maybe I get through that.
I've been a judge of the prize since a couple of years after I graduated, and we've seen it all, believe me.
I know.
We have one at Clark now that I judge with a few other people.
But, you know, the Van Sinner Prize, the criteria has always been
putting together a context, putting together a collection that meant something as a collection, not the value of the book.
So that's always been the criteria, is the imagination.
And that is the criteria, and I think especially with undergraduates, you know, anybody, well, if they've got the resources, go out and put together and design a collection.
Yeah.
And so we've never, you know, we've always been a little charry of author collections.
Because, you know, and frankly, you know, not for his years, but, you know, something like Faulkner is like, how boring can you get?
It's like, one publisher, you know, the guy, except for the early stuff, which he, you know, just expensive stuff he wasn't into yet, you know, you got one publisher, they all look the same, they're all the same formats, the limiteds are all these kind of modern, pre-unit limiteds as opposed to,
And Faulkner really wasn't that collectible, I think, when he was doing it, so they were, you could get them.
Yeah.
Well, he was, he was, but I mean, it wasn't like, you know, terrific imagination was needed to collect Faulkner.
I mean, he was, he was really into Faulkner.
He read all of Faulkner.
Well, so am I. I mean, you know, so what?
And in that sense, the others were.
One other thing we should cover.
I'm giving a talk in July,
The ALA is invited me, and they've got this theme.
In fact, this was Eric Holzenberg at the Grocer Publishing, to be honest.
And the theme is the museum of the book.
Do you foresee a time where to discuss whether or not we think that we are approaching a time when libraries will essentially be museums, and all the physical artifacts therein be, you know, specimens.
I mean, do you think that with computer technology and the future of books, do you think we're approaching a time where all books are going to be rare and curious objects?
Completely the opposite.
I think that the fastest growing field of study that I've seen in modern academia is the history of the book, the history of readership.
Exactly.
It's a field that's concentrated very much on the artifact